Add GSEA notebook specifically for scRNA-seq material (#486)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq/07-gene_set_enrichment_analysis.Rmd

GSEA is a functional class scoring (FCS) approach to pathway analysis that was first introduced in [Subramanian _et al._ (2005)](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102).
The rationale behind FCS approaches is that small changes in individual genes that participate in the same biological process or pathway can be significant and of biological interest.
FCS methods are better suited for identifying these pathways that show coordinated changes than ORA.
In ORA, we pick a cutoff that _typically_ only captures genes with large individual changes.

There are 3 general steps in FCS methods ([Khatri _et al._ 2012]( https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002375)):
 
1. Calculate a gene-level statistic (here, we'll use the summary log fold changes in our marker genes table)
2. Gene-level statistics are aggregated into a pathway-level statistic
3. Assess the statistical significance of the pathway-level statistic

We'll note here that GSEA was designed to detect small coordinated changes between _conditions_ in (necessarily bulk!) microarray data.
It may be more difficult to suss out small coordinated changes when we assay individual cells, due to technical or biological dropout. 

> Individual cells may also differently sized (Blasi *et al.* 2017), be at different stages of the cell cycle ([Satija lab](https://satijalab.org/seurat/archive/v3.1/cell_cycle_vignette.html)), or experiencing different levels of cellular stress ([Luecken and Theis. 2019](https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.20188746)), some of which may be interesting in the context of cancer and therefore should not be corrected for.

Reviewer: Blasi link?
```suggestion
Individual cells may also differently sized (Blasi *et al.* 2017), be at different stages of the cell cycle ([Satija lab](https://satijalab.org/seurat/archive/v3.1/cell_cycle_vignette.html)), or experiencing different levels of cellular stress ([Luecken and Theis 2019](https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.20188746)), some of which may be interesting in the context of cancer and therefore should not be corrected for.
```

(In practice, it is common to correct for cell cycle stage but we have not done that upstream.)
These aspects also have the potential to cloud our ability to detect small coordinated changes in other pathways.

There is some literature that suggests that dropout (excessive zeros) observed in single cell data is a function of cell type heterogeneity ([Kim *et al.* 2020](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-02096-y)). 
We're using GSEA to compare clusters of cells, which we (ideally) expect to be different biological states and/or cell types. 

> If many genes "drop out" between cell types, we may not expect to capture subtle signals between clusters.

Reviewer: A thought I have here is that the comparison we are looking at is in some ways a pseudo-bulk comparison in that we are looking at logfold changes between groups of cells. 

I don't know if there is any shrinkage applied in the LFC estimates from `findMarkers()` (I suspect not?), so while it is certainly noisy, my sense is we might overstate some effects as well as miss others.  Which is to say that I agree with the caveats, but might be a bit more ambiguous about directions of effect.

Author: How about something like:

> If many genes "drop out" between cell types, we may expect our statistics used as input to GSEA to be noisy.

Reviewer: 👍🏼

> With all this in mind, it may be unsurprising that ORA, which generally captures genes with large individual changes, is well-suited to analyzing scRNA-seq data and the advantages of GSEA in a bulk analysis setting may not be fully available here. 

Reviewer: Modifying slightly here... trying to capture why ORA is getting particular sets... Which really comes down to the fact that we sorted by p value/significance. 
```suggestion
With all this in mind, it may be unsurprising that ORA, which generally captures genes with large individual changes and lower within-group variation (the most "statistically significant" genes), is well-suited to analyzing scRNA-seq data and the advantages of GSEA in a bulk analysis setting may not be fully available here. 
```

```{r input_files}
input_file <- file.path(hodgkins_analysis_dir,
                        "markers",
                        "cluster01_markers_with_gene_symbols.tsv")
```

#### Output files

We'll save our table of GSEA results as a TSV.

```{r output_files}
output_file <- file.path(results_dir,
                         "cluster01_hallmarks_gsea_results.tsv")
```

## Gene sets

We will use gene sets from the [Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB)](https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/index.jsp) from the Broad Institute ([Subramanian, Tamayo *et al.* 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102)). 
The [`msigdbr`](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/msigdbr/index.html) package contains MSigDB datasets already in the tidy format required by `clusterProfiler` and supports multiple organisms.

Let's take a look at what organisms the package supports.

```{r show_species}
msigdbr_species()
```

MSigDB contains 8 different gene set collections.

    H: hallmark gene sets
    C1: positional gene sets
    C2: curated gene sets
    C3: motif gene sets
    C4: computational gene sets
    C5: GO gene sets
    C6: oncogenic signatures
    C7: immunologic signatures

> Because we're working with a sample that's partly comprised of immune cells, let's use the immunologic signatures to analyze our marker genes.

Reviewer: 🎉

```{r filter_dup_markers}
filtered_markers_df <- markers_df %>%
  # Sort so that the highest absolute values of the summary log2 fold change are 
  # at the top
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(abs(summary.logFC))) %>%
  # Filter out the duplicated rows using `dplyr::distinct()`
  dplyr::distinct(gene_symbol, .keep_all = TRUE)
```

Let's see what happened to our duplicate identifiers.

```{r show_filtered_markers, live = TRUE}
# Subset to & arrange by gene symbols that were duplicated in the original 
# data frame of results
filtered_markers_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(gene_symbol %in% duplicated_gene_symbols) %>%
  dplyr::arrange(gene_symbol)
```

Now we're ready to prep our pre-ranked list for GSEA.

### Pre-ranked list

The `GSEA()` function takes a pre-ranked (sorted) named vector of statistics, where the names in the vector are gene identifiers.
This is step 1 -- gene-level statistics.

Here, we're using the summary log fold change, which summarizes of all of the log fold changes from the pairwise comparisons between cluster 1 and other clusters into a single value ([ref](https://rdrr.io/bioc/scran/man/combineMarkers.html)). 

> As such, this statistic gives us information about the magnitude and directionality of a gene's expression in cluster 1 vs. all other clusters.

Reviewer: Overall I think this section seems fine. Just this minor tweak to wording.
```suggestion
As such, this statistic gives us information about the relative magnitude and directionality of each gene's expression in cluster 1 relative to all other clusters.
```

                     maxGSSize = 500,  # maximum gene set set
                     pvalueCutoff = 0.05,
                     pAdjustMethod = "BH",  # correction for multiple hypothesis testing
                     TERM2GENE = dplyr::select(hs_immunologic_df,
                                               gs_name,
                                               gene_symbol))
```
Let's take a look at the GSEA results.

```{r view_gsea, live = TRUE, eval = FALSE}
View(gsea_results@result %>%
       dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(NES))
)
```

Normalized enrichment scores (NES) are enrichment scores that are scaled to make gene sets that contain different number of genes comparable.

Let's write these results to file.

```{r write_gsea}
gsea_results@result %>% readr::write_tsv(output_file)
```

### Visualizing GSEA results

We can visualize GSEA results for individual pathways or gene sets using `enrichplot::gseaplot()`.
Let's take a look at 3 different pathways -- one with a highly positive NES, one with a highly negative NES, and one that was not a significant result -- to get more insight into how ES are calculated.

#### Highly Positive NES

> Let's take look at a pathway with a highly positive NES (`GSE29618_BCELL_VS_PDC_UP`) using a GSEA plot.

Reviewer: Do we want to say anything about what these pathways "are"? Maybe a link to https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/cards/GSE29618_BCELL_VS_PDC_UP, etc.

Author: Added quotes of the descriptions for the highly positive and highly negative examples from MSigDB + used the link for the non-significant result!
